---
title: "The World Community Grid: Make your computer’s idle time to useful"
date: 2010-09-28T00:01:30+05:30
draft: false
author: rhnvrm
categories:
  - uncategorized
url: blog/2010/09/28/wcg/
type: post
--- 

## Their Mission, Their Work and You

World Community Grid’s mission is to create the world’s largest public computing
 grid to tackle projects that benefit humanity.

The [World Community Grid]( World Community Grid) wants to turn you spare
computer power into life saving change around the globe. Sponsored by IBM, 
the WCG is a nonprofit that partners with research teams to help them analyze 
data and run simulations. Each person who joins WCG donates their idle computer 
time to solve a fraction of a larger problem. Put together, the fleet of WCG 
computers give scientists an amazing amount of processing power. WCG targets
that research which it feels will best serve the global community.

## How this works?

When idle, your computer will request data on a specific project from World
Community Grid’s server. It will then perform computations on this data,
send the results back to the server, and ask the server for a new piece of
work. Each computation that your computer performs provides scientists
with critical information that accelerates the pace of research!

## How many people are already helping? Am I the only one?

You are not the only one! Thousands of people are getting membership to this 
site per day! So join now.

## How to get Involved?

You just have to register and choose the projects you want to use your computing
 power for and then you will be able to download the file and voila, you have 
 just helped in helping the world.